Key starting point pages in Perfect Order: 130-131, 137
There's also relevant bg info in Priests and Programmers, e.g. some
basic stuff starting on page 44.

I sent the following to Matt Windsor on 5/19/2014:

I think that the confluence of historical, cultural, economic, and
personal forces at play in Stephen Lansing's account in his book
_Perfect Order_ (and other works) of the Balinese water temples is
complex.  I always say that modeling in social sciences and biology
usually involves abstracting out an aspect or dimension of a very
complex social or biological reality, but not assuming that the
reality is nothing more than what is modeled.  I now think that's more
true of the water temples case then I thought.  That is, upon
reviewing _Perfect Order_, I think the real-world processes are more
complex and subtle than I thought (even though I already thought they
were complex and sublte!).  I still think it's worth trying to model
the influence of  analogies between the Balinese water temple system as a
means of cooperation on water irrigation and pest control, and the
water temple system as a focus of various religious traditions.

Background:

Water temples manage sharing of water that comes down the mountainside
in streams, canals, and tunnels.  In order for farmers to have adequate
water at the right times, water must be diverted from one area to
another during certain periods of the year.  This has to be coordinated
at various levels of hierarchy in the water system.  The coordination
of water also affects the prevalence of pests, because if you dry out
a rice paddy, then the pests are starved.  Since pests can move from
one rice paddy to another, the overall level of pests can be kept in
check by management of when and where water is restricted.

Water temple groups are usually managed democractically, and
different water temple groups need to cooperatively coordinate water
use.  If they do so, then in the long run, that's better for everyone.
However, there are sometimes temptations for short-term gain that can
override what's good over the long term.

As I understand Lansing, the traditional worldview of Balinese
rice-farming communities assume that spiritual elements of the world
known as "bhutakala", which are present in the natural environment and
in people, tend to create trouble and disorder.  Religious rituals
provide various ways of creating more harmony, tamping down or partially
controlling these forces of trouble and disorder in the environment and
in people.  One variety of bhutakala-influenced trouble arises when
there is conflict within or between villages or water temple groups.
Another kind of bhutakala-influenced trouble arises when pests infest a
rice field.

Two levels of analogy:

First, my understanding is that some of the religious rituals that are
thought to help to produce order in the natural/social world and manage
the bhutakala, do so by producing order in the spiritual world (since
that's not really separate from the natural/social world).  However, it
sounds as if one of the things the rituals do might be to emphasize to
people the importance of order rather than trouble in their lives and in
their interactions with others in managing the water temple group.  This
is a spirtual goal, but having an orderly, smoothly running democracy
within the water temple group is a practical consequence.  So at this
level, there is an analogy between spiritual order and disorder, and
practical order and disorder.  (I admit that I feel funny now, calling
it an analogy, since from the point of view of the people in this
society, there is an identity rather than an analogy between spiritual
and practical order or disorder.)

Second, the rituals and other religious practices aren't just part of
a global religious system.  The water temples both manage water
distribution and manage certain rituals.  The practical and ritual
practice are viewed as intrinsically connected.  This means that the
water distrbution map is also a spiritual map, and keeping disorder in
check in the water temple system keeps disorder in check across the
whole mountainside.
